CSE3013 ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE L T P J C
3 0 0 4 4
Pre-requisite NIL Syllabus version
v1.0
Course Objectives:
1. To impart artificial intelligence principles, techniques and its history
2. To assess the applicability, strengths, and weaknesses of the basic knowledge 
representation, problem solving, and learning methods in solving engineering problems
3. To develop intelligent systems by assembling solutions to concrete computational 
problems
Expected Course Outcome:
1. Evaluate Artificial Intelligence (AI) methods and describe their foundations.
2. Apply basic principles of AI in solutions that require problem solving, inference, 
perception, knowledge representation and learning.
3. Demonstrate knowledge of reasoning and knowledge representation for solving real world 
problems
4. Analyze and illustrate how search algorithms play vital role in problem solving 
5. Illustrate the construction of learning and expert system
6. Discuss current scope and limitations of AI and societal implications.
Student Learning Outcomes (SLO): 1, 7, 17
Module:1 Artificial Intelligence and its Issues 9 hours
Definitions - Importance of AI, Evolution of AI - Applications of AI, Classification of AI systems 
with respect to environment, Knowledge Inferring systems and Planning, Uncertainty and towards 
Learning Systems.
Module:2 Overview to Problem Solving 5 hours
Problem solving by Search, Problem space - State space, Blind Search - Types, Performance 
measurement.
Module:3 Heuristic Search 4 hours
Types, Game playing mini-max algorithm, Alpha-Beta Pruning
Module:4 Knowledge Representation and 
Reasoning
7 hours
Logical systems Knowledge Based systems, Propositional Logic Constraints, Predicate Logic First 
Order Logic, Inference in First Order Logic, Ontological Representations and applications
Module:5 Uncertainty and knowledge Reasoning 7 hours
Overview Definition of uncertainty, Bayes Rule Inference, Belief Network, Utility Based System, 
Decision Network
Module:6 Learning Systems 4 hours
Forms of Learning Types - Supervised, Unsupervised, Reinforcement Learning, Learning 
Decision Trees
Module:7 Expert Systems 7 hours
Expert Systems - Stages in the development of an Expert System - Probability based Expert 
Systems - Expert System Tools - Difficulties in Developing Expert Systems - Applications of 
Expert Systems
Module:8 Recent Trends 2 hours
Total Lecture hours: 45 hours
Text Book(s)
1. Russell, S. and Norvig, P. 2015. Artificial Intelligence - A Modern Approach, 3rd edition, 
Prentice Hall.
2. Poole, D. and Mackworth, A. 2010. Artificial Intelligence: Foundations of Computational 
Agents, Cambridge University Press.
Reference Books
1. Ric, E., Knight, K and Shankar, B. 2009. Artificial Intelligence, 3rd edition, Tata McGraw 
Hill.
2. Luger, G.F. 2008. Artificial Intelligence -Structures and Strategies for Complex Problem 
Solving, 6th edition, Pearson.
3. Brachman, R. and Levesque, H. 2004. Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, Morgan 
Kaufmann.
4. Alpaydin, E. 2010. Introduction to Machine Learning. 2nd edition, MIT Press.
5. Sutton R.S. and Barto, A.G. 1998. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction, MIT Press.
6. Padhy, N.P. 2009. Artificial Intelligence and Intelligent Systems, Oxford University Press.
Mode of Evaluation: CAT / Assignment / Quiz / FAT / Project / Seminar
Recommended by Board of Studies 04-04-2014
Approved by Academic Council No. 37 Date 16-06-2015